docs:#600two stage bootstrap (#700)
redpanda-data/documentation: docs/reference/node-properties.mdx

</head>

Node configuration properties are applied individually to each node in a cluster. The following table lists each node configuration property in alphabetical order, along with its description and default setting.

After you change a node-level property setting, you must restart the node for the change to take effect.

### Required properties 

| Property | Description |
| :-------- | :----------- |

> | node_id | A number that identifies the node within the cluster. This value is assigned automatically, or it can be assigned by the user. Each node must have a unique node_id, and nodes should be numbered in sequence. This property must not be changed once a node joins a cluster. <br/><br/>For more information, see [Node IDs](../../deployment/production-deployment/#node-ids). <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: This should be removed from the "Required properties" section.

> "nodes should be numbered in sequence"

Redpanda will assign node IDs in sequence, but this property doesn't have to be configured to be in sequence.

At best, we should put it into "Optional properties", but it's not something we should be recommending people use moving forward.

Author: Thank you! I moved this to the table of optional properties with the following description: 
A number that identifies the node within the cluster. Redpanda assigns this in sequence automatically, or it can be assigned by the user. Each node must have a unique ID. This property must not be changed after a node joins a cluster.

| :-------- | :----------- |
| admin | Address and port of the admin server. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:9644 |
| admin_api_doc_dir | Path to the admin API documentation directory. <br/><br/>Default: /usr/share/redpanda/admin-api-doc |
| admin_api_tls | TLS configuration for the Admin API. <br/><br/>Default: Null |
| advertised_kafka_api | Address of Kafka API published to clients. <br/><br/>Default: an empty array |
| advertised_rpc_api | Address of the RPC endpoint published to other cluster members. <br/><br/>Default: Null |
| cloud_storage_cache_directory | The directory where the cache archive is stored. This property is mandatory when cloud_storage_enabled is set to true. <br/><br/>Default: Null|
| coproc_supervisor_server | IP address and port for supervisor service. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:43189 |
| dashboard_dir | The directory where the HTTP dashboard is located. <br/><br/>Default: Null |
| developer_mode | Skips most of the checks performed at startup. Not recommended for production use. <br/><br/>Default: True |

> | empty_seed_starts_cluster | Controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluster. <br/><br/>Default: True | 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| empty_seed_starts_cluster | Controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluster. <br/>Recommended: False<br/><br/>Default: True, for backwards compatibility | 
```

> | empty_seeds_forms_cluster | When set to true, this is the list of seed nodes used to join the current cluster. <br/><br/>When set to false, this denotes a set of nodes to initially bootstrap the cluster if the cluster is not formed yet. In this case, `seed_servers` cannot be empty. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: Please change all references of `empty_seeds_forms_cluster` to `empty_seed_starts_cluster` (sorry I didn't give the exact config name to start with!)

Reviewer: Also the default is True, not Null

Reviewer: The description here seems to be meant for `seed_servers`, not `empty_seed_starts_cluster`.

How about, "When set to true, the node configurations in the cluster must define a single root node to act as the first node in the cluster, as indicated by an empty `seed_servers` configuration on the root node. When set to false, the node configurations must define a set of seed servers to act as the first nodes in the cluster."

Reviewer 2: @andrwng what do you think about my proposal how to change that? It has landed on another file though:
https://github.com/redpanda-data/documentation/pull/700#discussion_r1003520602
https://github.com/redpanda-data/documentation/pull/700#discussion_r1003528662

> | empty_seed_starts_cluster | Controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluster.<br/><br/>Before a cluster is created, one node should set this property to empty to start a new cluster, which the other nodes will join.<br/><br/>When set to true, this is the list of seed nodes used to join the current cluster.  <br/><br/>When set to false, if the cluster has not yet been created, then this is the node that initially bootstraps the cluster. In this case, the seed_servers property cannot be empty, and it also must be identical in all nodes in that list. For any node not in the seed_servers list, it is the list of nodes used to join a cluster. <br/><br/>Default: True | 

Reviewer: Let's just point to the `seed_servers` property instead of re-explaining here.

Controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluster. See `seed_servers` for more details.

Default: True

Author: fixed: https://deploy-preview-700--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/reference/node-properties/

| kafka_api | Address of the Kafka API that handles requests. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:9092 |
| kafka_api_tls | Transport Layer Security (TLS) configuration for the Kafka API endpoint. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

> | node_id | A number that identifies the node within the cluster. Redpanda assigns this in sequence automatically, or it can be assigned. Each node must have a unique ID. This property must not be changed after a node joins a cluster. <br/><br/>This must be a positive number, unless `empty_seed_starts_cluster=true` and `seed_servers` is either empty or omitted, in which case the property must either be omitted or set to 0. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: Should remove the end of the sentence after and including "unless `empty_seed_starts_cluster..`", as it's not true. There is no relationship between node ID assignment and `empty_seed_starts_cluster`, nor is there ever a requirement to explicitly set it to 0.

Author: fixed

> | node_id | A number that identifies the node within the cluster. Redpanda assigns this in sequence automatically, or it can be assigned manually. Each node must have a unique ID. This property must not be changed after a node joins a cluster. <br/><br/>This must be a positive number. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: I don't think it's worth explicitly stating that Redpanda assigns these in sequence. Any reason to in particular? How about:

A number that uniquely identifies the node within the cluster. If set, must be a positive number. If unset, Redpanda assigns one automatically. This property must not be changed after a node joins the cluster.

| rack | A rack is a label that identifies a failure zone. Apply the same label to all nodes in the same failure zone. When enable_rack_awareness is set to true at the cluster level, the system uses the rack labels to spread partition replicas across different failure zones. <br/><br/>Default: Null |
| rpc_server | Remote Procedure Call (RPC) server IP address. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:33145 |
| rpc_server_tls | TLS configuration for RPC server. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

> | seed_servers | If this is empty, the node will be a cluster root and it will form a new cluster. <br/><br/>When `empty_seeds_forms_cluster` is true, that is the list of seed nodes used to join the current cluster. <br/><br/>When `empty_seeds_forms_cluster` is false, it denotes a set of nodes that will initially bootstrap the cluster if the cluster is not formed yet. In this case, `seed_servers` cannot be empty. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: I found this a bit confusing. How about:

"List of the seed servers used to join the current cluster.

When `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is True, if the `seed_servers` list is empty, the node will be a cluster root and it will form a new cluster if one does not already exist.

When `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is False, denotes the set of nodes that will initially bootstrap the cluster if the cluster is not formed yet."

> | seed_servers | List of seed nodes used to join the current cluster.<br/><br/>This property is impacted by the empty_seed_starts_cluster property:<br/><br/>empty_seed_starts_cluster = True: If a cluster doesn't already exist and seed_servers is empty, then the node is a cluster root to form a new cluster.<br/><br/>empty_seed_starts_cluster = False: If a cluster doesn't already exist, then the list of nodes in seed_servers initially bootstrap the cluster.<br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: I liked @dlex's descriptions. Can we model these after what he laid out in the comment?

https://github.com/redpanda-data/documentation/pull/700#discussion_r1003528662 

Tweaked a bit, how's this?:

List of seed servers used to join a cluster if a cluster exists. If a cluster does not already exist:

When `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is true, if the `seed_servers` list is empty, this node will be the cluster root and it will form a new cluster that other nodes will subsequently join. Exactly one node in the cluster should configure this to be empty when first bootstrapping a cluster. On nodes that are not the root node, this is the list of nodes used to join the cluster.

When `empty_seed_starts_cluster` is false, refers to the set of nodes that will initially bootstrap the cluster. In this case, `seed_servers` cannot be empty, and it must be identical on all nodes that belong to that list. On nodes that do not belong to the `seed_servers` list, this is the list of nodes used to join the cluster.

Author: fixed: https://deploy-preview-700--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/reference/node-properties/

> | seed_servers | List of seed nodes used to join the current cluster.<br/><br/>This property is impacted by the empty_seed_starts_cluster property:<br/><br/>empty_seed_starts_cluster = True: If a cluster doesn't already exist and seed_servers is empty, then the node is a cluster root to form a new cluster.<br/><br/>empty_seed_starts_cluster = False: If a cluster doesn't already exist, then the list of nodes in seed_servers initially bootstrap the cluster.<br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer: While technically this is optional, it is something I think we should strongly encourage users to think about. To that end, how about we move this the Required Properties section?

cc @dlex

Author: discussed with Andrew & leaving as optional for now

| coproc_supervisor_server | IP address and port for supervisor service. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:43189 |
| dashboard_dir | The directory where the HTTP dashboard is located. <br/><br/>Default: Null |
| developer_mode | Skips most of the checks performed at startup. Not recommended for production use. <br/><br/>Default: True |

> | empty_seed_starts_cluster | Specifies the meaning of the seed_nodes property and controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluser.<br/><br/>When set to true, this is the list of seed nodes used to join the current cluster. Before a cluster is created, one node should have this set to empty to start a new cluster, which the other nodes will join. <br/><br/>When set to false, this is the nodes that initially bootstrap the cluster if the cluster is not formed yet. In this case, seed_servers cannot be empty, and it also must be identical in all nodes that belong to that list. In any node that does not belong to the seed_servers list, it is the list of nodes used to join a cluster. <br/><br/>Default: True | 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| empty_seed_starts_cluster | Specifies the meaning of the `seed_nodes` property and controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluster.<br/><br/>When set to true, this is the list of seed nodes used to join the current cluster. Before a cluster is created, one node should set this property to empty to start a new cluster, which the other nodes will join. <br/><br/>When set to false, this is the node that initially bootstraps the cluster if the cluster is not yet created. In this case, `seed_servers` cannot be empty, and it also must be identical in all nodes that belong to that list. In any node that does not belong to the `seed_servers` list, it is the list of nodes used to join a cluster. <br/><br/>Default: True | 
```

Reviewer 3: I tried to update this for clarity, but after reading it twice, I still am not clear about:
- exactly what a seed node is
- "Specifies the meaning" --I don't understand this...maybe "Defines the seed_nodes property..."?
- How does specifying "true" result in a list?
- I just can't understand the last line: "In any node that does not belong to the `seed_servers` list, it is the list of nodes used to join a cluster."

Author: @Feediver1 I'll work on this tomorrow (with help from Alexey and Andrew). I did incorporate your suggested edits except for putting the properties in code blocks (since I'd need to do it for the entire file and I figure it's something we'd verify for style guide post release). I think we should do it, but it's a general cleanup that needs to be made in lots of reference tables.

Author: @Feediver1 this was changed a good bit, with a better description of how Redpanda uses seed nodes here: https://deploy-preview-700--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/deployment/custom-deployment/#configure-the-seed-servers

| developer_mode | Skips most of the checks performed at startup. Not recommended for production use. <br/><br/>Default: True |
| kafka_api | Address of the Kafka API that handles requests. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:9092. |
| kafka_api_tls | Transport Layer Security (TLS) configuration for the Kafka API endpoint. <br/><br/>Default: Null. |

> | node_id | A number that identifies the node within the cluster. Redpanda assigns this in sequence automatically, or it can be assigned by the user. Each node must have a unique ID. This property must not be changed after a node joins a cluster. <br/><br/>For more information, see [Node IDs](../../deployment/production-deployment/#node-ids). <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer 2: > .... or it can be assigned by the user

Referring to a 'user' here might be confusing: my first thought when I read this was whether there is a way to assign node_id via kafka API.

Author: fixed

> | node_id | A number that identifies the node within the cluster. Redpanda assigns this in sequence automatically, or it can be assigned by the user. Each node must have a unique ID. This property must not be changed after a node joins a cluster. <br/><br/>For more information, see [Node IDs](../../deployment/production-deployment/#node-ids). <br/><br/>Default: Null |

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention that it must be a positive number, with one rare exception: when `empty_seed_starts_cluster=True` and `seed_servers` is empty or omitted, the property must either be omitted or set to `0`.

Author: added!

| rack | A rack is a label that identifies a failure zone. Apply the same label to all nodes in the same failure zone. When enable_rack_awareness is set to true at the cluster level, the system uses the rack labels to spread partition replicas across different failure zones. <br/><br/>Default: Null. |
| rpc_server | Remote Procedure Call (RPC) server IP address. <br/><br/>Default: 127.0.0.1:33145. |
| rpc_server_tls | TLS configuration for RPC server. <br/><br/>Default: Null |

> | seed_servers | List of the seed servers used to join the current cluster. If the seed_servers list is empty, the node will be a cluster root and it will form a new cluster. <br/><br/>For more information, see [Seed servers list](../../deployment/production-deployment/#instantiate-a-cluster).<br/><br/>Default: Null. |

Reviewer: Just noting again that once Alexey's PR is in, we should document the `empty_seeds_forms_cluster` property, which changes this behavior.

Reviewer 2: It's in, so the meaning of `seed_servers` is different now. When `empty_seeds_forms_cluster` is True, it is as described now. When `empty_seeds_forms_cluster` is False, it denotes a set of nodes that will initially bootstrap the cluster all together if the cluster is not formed yet. In this case `seed_servers` can never be empty.

We need to mention more requirements that are in effect at the cluster bootstrap stage, but maybe there is a more appropriate page for that; in that case, that page can be referred from here.

Author: @andrwng, @dlex: I'm unclear about these properties. Please review the descriptions for both seed_servers and empty_seeds_form_cluster:  https://deploy-preview-700--redpanda-documentation.netlify.app/docs/reference/node-properties/

Reviewer: Looks like the `seed_servers` has been changed in the latest docs.

+1 to updating `empty_seed_starts_cluster`, though you mean `seed_servers` not `seed_nodes`

Author: Closing this as resolved. Andrew confirmed the following property descriptions:
empty_seed_starts_cluster	
Controls how a new cluster is formed. This property must have the same value in all nodes in a cluster.
Default: True

seed_servers	
List of seed servers used to join an existing cluster. If a cluster does not already exist, then:
When empty_seed_starts_cluster is true, if the seed_servers list is empty, this node will be the cluster root to form a new cluster that other nodes subsequently join. Exactly one node in the cluster should set seed_servers to be empty when first bootstrapping a cluster. For nodes that are not the root node, this is the list of nodes used to join the cluster.
When empty_seed_starts_cluster is false, this refers to the list of nodes that initially bootstrap the cluster. In this case, seed_servers cannot be empty, and seed_servers must be identical for all nodes in that list. For nodes not in the seed_servers list, this is the list of nodes used to join the cluster.
Default: Null
